In the previous lectures,
we learned a lot about basic Git features
and we learned a lot about commits,
moving between commits and so on.
Now, one key feature is missing though,
and that would be branches.
Now, Git branches are a key concept of Git
and they're just as important as commits.
Thankfully, though, they're also related to commits.
So it's not something brand new in general,
but instead a feature that builds up
on this snapshot and commit idea.
But what are branches all about?
Well, as you are working on a project,
you start collecting commits, you could say.
You commit your various changes,
as we also did it in the previous lectures,
and eventually, you have more and more commits.
And these commits are organized in branches,
and you got one branch out of the box
without doing anything.
The main branch.
It could also be called master branch though.
But you do have this default branch
because that branch is created
whenever you initialize a new Git repository
and you start creating snapshots, commits.
And that main branch is what you see when you run git log.
Here, you see all your commits
and you also see this name
of that default branch which you have.
And those different commits which you created
are organized into that branch.
So you could say branches are containers
that contain commits.
But I'm saying branches instead of branch
because you can have more than one branch in a project.
You can create additional branches,
for example, to work on a new feature or a bug fix
without immediately impacting your main code.
Let's say in this project here,
we want to restructure the content of this website,
the code of this website.
We want to add some new wrapping HTML elements
and we want to add some additional elements.
We want to do that without impacting our main work
in the main branch,
which might focus on maintaining this current state
and just fixing bugs related to that website.
We only want to apply our changes
once we're done with all the various code changes
that are involved in that new feature which we plan to add.
Of course, here for this tiny example,
we won't add too many new features,
but in more complex projects,
you could easily spend a couple of days
working on a brand-new feature.
And you want to work on that feature in a place
where you don't interfere with your colleagues
that might still be working on the old code
and might be fixing bugs there.
That's why you can create branches.
You could, for example, create a new feature branch
by running this git branch command,
which is offered by Git.
By default, this command takes the latest commit,
which is currently targeted by head,
and it builds a new branch
with this commit as the starting point.
Now all the old commits are also taken along,
but this commit is now the starting point
of this new branch.
So the same commit is now part of multiple branches.
Now you could still continue work in the main branch
and for example, create new commits there,
but those commits would then not be part
of that other branch, of the feature-1 branch.
On the other hand,
you could also add commits there in that branch
without immediately affecting the main branch.
And that's what I mean.
Different teams could, for example,
work on different branches
so that they can work on their different features
or bug fixes without interfering with each other.
Now eventually, of course,
you might want to combine all these code changes though,
because if we stick to the example of a website,
the goal is of course not to build multiple websites,
but to still work on one single website,
just on different features or bug fixes
that are all relevant to that same website.
And that's why eventually,
you can merge those different branches
with the git merge command.
If you run that command,
all the commits that are part of one branch,
of the feature-1 branch for example,
will be merged with the commits of the main branch,
and Git will automatically try to commit those changes
such that nothing is overwritten.
If you do have clashing code changes though,
you might need to resolve those problems manually,
but that's something we cover in greater detail
in our complete Git course.
It's a little bit too advanced for this crash course.
In many cases, the automatic merging works just fine.